---
title: Learning and Loving React
description: My journey with ReactJS so far.
date: 2025-02-14T14:36:41.601Z
---
Interestingly enough, React was my first attempt at frontend web development,
back in 2019. It didn't take me much to understand the basics then, but it
didn't excite me either. I was in college at the time, having fun with writing
Telegram bots and command line tools. Colors in an html file did not really
concern me but I tried, and failed. But after 5 years and a lot of
[Vue](https://vuejs.org/), I'm back in the game. This time though its a bit
different. The nuances of CSS and insanity of user experience is much more
apparent to me.

This is my story of learning and loving [React](https://react.dev/).

## The first attempt
Back when I tried to learn React, it was preferring a class based approach. I
was not familiar with JavaScript classes at the time. Moreover, it felt somewhat
different from all the other frameworks I have seen before. But since it was my
first time checking out any frontend web framework, I couldn't really expect
anything. My tech stack at the time was mostly [NestJs](https://nestjs.com/),
[Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/stable/) and
[Gin](https://gin-gonic.com/). Those frameworks, each from different languages,
were beautifully written. Examples were great and tips and tricks were really
helpful. Even if I tried, I couldn't write bad code in flask. Maybe because I
loved python, or because it was very lite weight, or because it was a backend
framework. Mind you, backend developers are obsessed with code quality and
overall hygiene. This is were I started my career, and this initial part
influenced me from there onwards.

React felt nothing like those frameworks. The getting started documentation was
decent enough, but not in a level of NestJS, or Flask, or Gin. Maybe there was
some other documentation I could check but I certainly didn't see any. It does
not mean the React community is lacking any resources. There are plenty of
medium posts, video tutorials, udemy courses and many more. But an official
documentation, that too a simple one, is an important first step in a long
journey. I don't remember building anything in React at the time, except a
counter, which is what every one us build as a first project.

My venture with React then came to quick stop. I could almost say the initial
novelty vanished off very quickly. The only outcome of that trial is cementing
my belief that backend developers and technologies are superior. I do realise I
was wrong, and every piece of technology is important. But lets fast forward 5
years into 2024, and I'm going to try React again.

## Once more
The year is 2024, month of September and the occasion is work. It is important
to understand that I had an option between Vue or React, and I was fairly good
with Vue at this point. But I chose React. Who does not love some challenge? I
was practicing some React here and there for some some. I wrote a counter
(again) and a tic tac toe game in React, which was a decent experience. React
suddenly did not feel as bad how I felt before, so I wanted to continue, have a
go at something I couldn't crack before. 

## Users as a service
I already told you that I was fairly comfortable with Vue. I'll tell you about
that later, in another post, maybe. But the exposure to one frontend web
framework taught me something. The way you think when writing user facing
software is different from that of backend (hidden) frameworks. Honestly, _we
are the only industry where customers are called users_ and a for a good reason.
_People use our product, and we use them. They are our lab rats. They are
idiots. They are numbers_. A common man (or woman) does not care how good your
code is. They don't care if your method is performant. They want to see things.
They want things in the way they expect it to be. You can try it yourself. If
you are a backend developer with zero interest in user facing stuff, build
something you think you are efficient and give them to people for free. You can
have plenty of never expecting feedback quickly. I would say it is important to
touch grass once in a while, and I did, with Vue. And it made my React learning
a little bit better.

## CSS
I hated CSS. It never made sense to me. But at some point in my career, I was
forced to embrace it and that changed my perspective. Don't get me wrong, CSS is
still somewhat weird, but I do see how people do it, how we can use it and how
good it is. Most of my CSS experience is with
[Tailwind](https://tailwindcss.com/). Without it I couldn't call myself a CSS
ninja. We could almost say Tailwind is synonymous with CSS these days. But
enough about it, React don't need CSS to work.

## From a Vue perspective
Even though I don't want to have a bias towards Vue, it is almost impossible to
do the comparison. And this comparison is especially relevant when TypeScript is
involved. I assume you know what TypeScript is and why it is needed. I won't be
killing your time preaching something you already know.

> Vue supports TypeScript but React is TypeScript.

The goodness of typing, whole of it, is readily available in React. This is no
magic, React is simply a collection of functions that compile into native
JavaScript, while Vue do some magic to convert
[Vue DSL](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=15340300) to JavaScript. The
difference is that the developer experience, at-least at the surface level, is
much better with React. You use native array map to loop through your list of
items, unlike magic in Vue. This make React somewhat east to pick up.

## Hooks
But but! Why wasn't I able to learn this thing some time ago? Well the answer
mostly is hooks. Hooks are a newer addition to React, and these tiny blocks of
logic replaced classes. So everything is a function now, and fortunately it felt
very similar to what I did with Vue. I feel hooks and functions are much better
than classes. I personally feel the code is much more splittable now, and it
kind of helps with bigger codebases. But do not take my word for it, for I am
still learning the framework. Hooks brings their own chaos though. There are
annoying rules I have to follow when writing components. I don't know why they
have to be there but I'm sure there is a reason.

## Ecosystem
The ecosystem! How can I not talk about the React ecosystem? If there something
you want, there is a plugin for that in React. Whether you want design systems,
tooling or anything remotely related to React, it is there. All you have to do
is a basic web search. I love [shadcn/ui](https://ui.shadcn.com/), I love
[Zustand](https://zustand-demo.pmnd.rs/) and I'm sure there are plenty of other
such plugins we will love.

## Conclusion
I am learning and loving React at the moment. But there are annoyances too.
There is a lack of overall code hygiene. There are signs of mediocrity. But as
someone said, this is no time for hate. That comes later.

Adios!
